Welcome.
Just getting started with Objective-C,
a simple, elegant, and dynamic language.
I'm Bill Bumgarner.
I manage the runtime team.
We're responsible for Objective-C,
garbage collection, blocks,
and a handful of other things.
And I really do want to welcome you
to Mac OS X and iPhone OS programming.
I know a lot of you are new to this.
It's an exciting platform.
There's a lot of movement in this.
There's a lot of new things.
Yet at the same time,
I think you'll find that it's
also a very mature platform.
You can rely on the features,
you can rely on the language.
In particular, I know that when you're
learning something,
if you learn like I do,
you often learn by example.
And to that end,
what we're going to do is we're
actually going to look at an example.
Excuse me for a second.
And I want to show you
what is Objective-C.
I want to give you a foundation
with which you can read
Objective-C effectively
and you can understand it,
and then show you that Objective-C is
a foundation for a lot of patterns
in Mac OS X and on the iPhone,
and really give you a set of tools that
you can go forth into the other sessions
throughout the week and very quickly
digest and internalize the information.
I don't have enough time to
do a full language survey.
I really don't have enough time to
effectively teach you all of Objective-C.
But with that, let's move on.
What is Objective-C?
Well, let's do a little bit
of a guided tour here.
I'm going to do a
little high level intro,
and then we're going
to get into some code.
So Objective-C is a language
that's been around quite a while.
1984, I believe, was when StepStone,
the company that created Objective-C,
was actually created.
It's a set of syntactic extensions to C.
It's literally extensions.
It doesn't try to
change the meaning of C.
There's a couple of additional types
that you'll find in the language
and you'll see throughout the code.
It does have class methods.
They're not like Java static methods.
As well,
it's like C++ in that it separates
the interface from the implementation,
so your implementation will
be kind of more private,
and your interface,
the part that other people will use or
you'll use in other places in your code,
is separated out.
It has a single inheritance model,
which is a little bit simpler.
But it does have a
feature called protocols,
which Java borrowed as interfaces.
Which allows you to actually share
interfaces across multiple classes.
There are categories which give you
the ability to extend existing classes.
Subdivide your implementation.
Method invocation.
Objective-C is different
than C++ or other languages.
On the garbage, or on, I should say,
memory management,
there are two different styles of
memory management you can choose
when you're programming for OS X.
On the iPhone,
you use reference counting only.
On OS X, you can use reference counting
or garbage collection.
There's also a feature called Properties,
which is relatively new to the language.
It was added in the last few years,
which allow you to syntactically express
what items are data in your objects.
There's also a dynamic runtime
underneath all of this.
It's actually active.
It runs with your application.
It's very important,
and we'll get to that in a moment.
So,
let's talk about grokking Objective-C.
And when I said learn by example,
I mean quite literally.
If you have your computer open,
you have the dev tools installed.
If you were to open the example,
developer examples, app kit, iSpend,
most of the code is going
to come directly from that.
You'll see some differences
on screen because,
well, no one programs on 1024 by 768,
but I have to make slides in that size.
So, first, Objective-C.
It is C.
It's a set of extensions to C,
and this is probably the first
Hello World program ever written,
back in '70-something.
And if you were to look in your project,
which will look something like this,
and open up,
you'll see that there is a main file.
And if you look in that main file in
Objective-C in a Cocoa app on the iPhone,
you'd see something very similar,
not quite the same.
You'll see it's C.
Calls the main, passes control to Cocoa.
Now, you probably built and run the app.
It comes up.
It shows a window on the screen.
It's a document window.
So you're thinking, okay,
let's go figure out how this thing works.
Let's look at the document class.
And you'll see there's
a mydocument.im file.
And if you were to open
that up and look at it,
there'll be something like this.
And if we look at this,
we can see that there are some
differences in Objective-C than C.
In particular,
we can see there's some of the new types.
So in this case, we see I've highlighted
some of them here.
There's nil.
Nil is the empty object.
It's like null in C.
But it's nil so that the compiler can
differentiate between an empty object
and a pointer to nowhere or nothing,
I should say.
Oh, sorry.
I went one forward.
too fast.
There's also an ID,
which is a generic object reference.
It's a typeless reference
to some object somewhere.
It's kind of like a void pointer,
but this gives the compiler
the ability to know that,
oh, you've got a reference
to some object somewhere.
You can message it.
You can do things with it,
but you don't know what type it is.
There's also Boolean type.
Objective-C defines bool, all uppercase.
It is different than bool, all lowercase.
Of course, this is C,
so there's some wonderfully
intuitive details like that.
There's a yes and a no that are defined,
and I will mention it again.
It's different than bool,
the lowercase one,
and when you convert between the two,
you have to be careful.
As well, Objective-C is an
object-oriented language.
What's the first object
you ever encounter in any
object-oriented language?
A String class.
In Objective-C there's NSString.
This encapsulates strings.
Now,
this gets into something very important.
When we talk about a tour of
language like this on a platform
like Mac OS X and the iPhone,
it's impossible to separate the language
from the implementation details.
So when we talk about NSString,
that's really not part of the language.
There is this convenient
syntax for creating these
things inline and on the fly,
but really NSString is
part of the foundation.
However, you know,
you've got to write code quick,
so here's a convenience for you.
You'll see the @ sign
a lot in Objective-C.
It's often used to introduce
Objective-C-isms into code.
And of course, it's object-oriented,
so we declare methods.
This is an init method.
It has a dash in front of it
because it's an instance method.
And this is the initialize method,
which has a plus in front of
it because it's a class method.
And if you'll notice, there's this
Add Implementation My Document,
which again gets back to the separation
of implementation and interface.
So, at implementation implies
that there's probably gonna
be an add interface somewhere.
And sure enough,
if we go back to our project,
we'll see there's a my document.h file.
It's being C or being derived from C.
You'll have .h files,
which are the parts that are included
into other things to allow those
other things to use that interface.
So, double clicking my document,
we'll see a standard
class declaration here.
In particular, @interface, my document,
the class name,
inherits from the class NSDocument.
So we're creating a subclass
of the NSDocument class.
And of course,
we can declare instance variables.
Now, instance variables are kind
of an implementation detail.
Yet, because we're in C,
it's often very important for
the compiler to know exactly how
things are laid out in memory.
And thus, this implementation detail
usually has to be exposed.
So you'll see the instance variable
declarations in the interfaces.
And then we also can
declare a lot of methods.
In this case,
we're declaring three instance
methods and a class method.
Now, what's interesting about method
declaration is you might have noticed,
well, yes, instance, class,
I forgot about these transitions.
You might have noticed
in your source file,
if you have it up on screen,
that these methods are not declared.
The reason why is because
they're actually declared
in a superclass somewhere.
And because my document's implementation
of them is not really that interesting.
It's not something that the designer of
my document felt needed to be called out.
So they're inherited from somewhere.
You typically won't see things like this,
their declarations repeated.
So moving along,
we now see we've got three methods here.
And we have transactions.
This is a method that returns
a reference to an NSArray,
takes no arguments.
Objective-C interleaves
arguments with the method names.
So we see set transactions
colon as a method in here.
The colon means there's
going to be an argument.
And when you get two arguments,
like this one,
you'll see that the name of
the method is interleaved
with the actual argumentation.
So this method is insert
transactions at indexes.
That's the whole name, the full name,
and nothing but the name.
Names of methods,
they're called selectors.
So,
these are three selectors on our object,
three methods that it implements.
You can't drop parts of them.
So, again,
and this is something I'll repeat
a little bit because I've taught a
lot of Objective-C over the years,
and this comes up for people
that are coming to the language.
A method's name is its selector,
and it's very important to
know that in Objective-C,
there is a type, an SEL,
which represents a method name.
And you'll see it quite often.
For example, the NSObject class,
which is the base class used throughout
Cocoa and iPhone programming,
implements a method
called responseToSelector.
It takes a selector as an argument.
It returns a Boolean if that
object responds to that selector.
This means it's very easy to ask
objects these kinds of questions.
Because it's so easy,
you'll see certain design patterns
fall out of that that rely upon that.
For example, delegation, target action,
the way the thread class works,
the way operations work,
a number of other classes.
And again, set transactions:
if our class were to
implement all of these,
set transactions: set transactions:
of type: and finally, set transactions:
of type: in context:.
Normally we don't say the colons,
but for specificity I'll mention them.
These are all distinct selectors.
In Objective-C,
you can't drop parts of the selector.
That becomes a different method.
So moving on here,
we saw that our document class was
doing a lot of stuff with transactions.
Let's have a look at
the transaction class.
The declaration of this
looks a little bit different.
As a matter of fact,
I think if I don't remember correctly,
the declaration of it doesn't
contain anything like the method
declarations we saw before.
It also has this little
thing up at the top,
NSCoding, in brackets, angle brackets.
This is a protocol.
This is telling the compiler
and declaring that this class
is going to implement whatever
is promised by the protocol.
In this case,
a protocol is a reusable interface.
It is a collection of methods,
a set of method declarations.
And what we are saying when we declare
that our class implements a protocol
is that we are promising to provide
an implementation of those methods.
Now, furthermore, we can also ask the
instances of the class later,
hey, do you conform to this protocol?
So protocols can also have
optional methods and required
methods in their declarations.
So when you say that you
implement a particular protocol,
like the UI table view
data source on your class,
you must provide those first two methods.
And you can optionally provide any
of a number of other methods that are
declared in the add optional section
to further change the interaction
between a table view and your object.
And it's important to note
@Required is the default.
If you looked at the
NS coding declaration,
there was no @Required there.
It's cuz all the methods are required.
So, protocols.
There's something you can,
when you declare a class,
you can say that the class
implements a protocol,
and you are promising to provide
an implementation of the required
methods in that protocol.
You can also specify multiple protocols.
You can also declare a protocol
that implements another protocol.
So you're basically promising that
anything that uses that protocol or
implements that protocol will have
to implement all required methods in
whatever protocol that protocol uses.
And you'll see there's
this NSObject protocol.
There's actually a number of protocols
on the system that are pretty common.
That's because in Objective-C,
the base class is more or less advisory.
That is, you can write your own
root class if you want to.
Almost no one ever does.
If you do,
you'd have to pretty much reinvent
everything in the NSObject protocol,
which, again,
the language being inseparable from
the system itself is a lot of work.
Some of the other protocols
you'll find on the platform in
the foundation is NSCopying,
NSMutableCopying.
NSCopying for creating
a copy of an object.
MutableCopying for creating a
copy of the object where that
copy could be changed later.
NSLocking for integration with threading.
And NSFastEnumeration for taking
advantage of the four enumeration
of collections of objects.
It's interesting to note that the
iPhone OS actually uses protocols
a lot more than Cocoa programming.
It's one of the few areas
where there is some difference.
In particular, you'll see things like
the application delegate,
table view data sources,
all these things declared as protocols.
That was actually done because it
allows the compiler to give you better
warnings and errors when you mess
up a type or something like that.
It's literally to
provide better checking.
Now, there's something else interesting
when you look at this project.
You see there's this mydocument.h,
mydocument.m.
But then there's also a couple of
other My Document file names in here.
We have these two pasteboard ones.
That's because the implementer
of this application decided,
let's subdivide the implementation of
My Document for organizational purposes
and pull the pasteboard functionality
out and put them in different files.
And they did that by using
Objective-C categories.
A category allows you to take
a collection of methods and
add it to an existing class.
So, in this case,
we're declaring a category
called Pasteboard that
extends the My Document class.
It adds a number of methods to it.
And if we look at the
implementation file,
We'll actually see the
implementations of those methods in
an Add Implementation block that,
again, declares a pasteboard category
on the My Document class.
Now, what's interesting about this,
and I worked hard to make sure
I got a screenshot of this in,
because this is a new feature
in the Xcode you have with
you called Open Quickly,
and it is terribly cool.
If you were to hit
Shift-Command-D and type nsthread,
you'd see a list something like this.
And if you open nsthread.h,
you'll see that it actually
has in its API a declaration of
a category on NSObject called
nsthread perform additions.
What this is actually doing is
adding additional functionality
to the NSObject class.
Now, you can add additional functionality
to NSObject if you want to as well.
It's not--the barrier is not at, say,
framework boundaries.
So if you have some particular
thing that you want every object
in your entire application,
no matter who wrote it, to do,
you could add it to NSObject if you want.
It's a feature to be used with
care from a design perspective,
as you can probably imagine.
And again,
NSThread has an implementation something
like this for adding those methods.
So categories, they allow you to add
methods to existing classes,
kinda like class extensions in C#.
But Java doesn't do this.
You can add methods to classes
outside of your project.
You cannot add instance variables.
It can't affect the storage of the class.
And this is because, of course,
if you change, say,
the storage in a C program,
change the layout of a structure,
and you have other structures
that are dependent on that,
then everything has to be recompiled
or else the layout gets all messed up
and you get really interesting crashes.
However, on Snow Leopard,
you can add associative references.
You can use associative references
to associate a piece of data
with an instance or a class,
which gives an instance
variables-like feature.
You can also,
you can access instance variables though.
So if the class declares
instance variables,
you can access them from
within your categories.
Do this with care.
It's likely that the class has some
logic related to the state management.
There may also be some
limitations to doing this,
depending on what version of the
operating system you're linking with
and whether or not the instance variable
you're trying to get to is inside
whatever you're compiling or is in,
say, a system-provided framework
or some other piece of code.
So let's step away from the
syntax part of this a little bit,
the declarative part,
and let's actually look at the
method calling mechanism itself.
Objective-C uses a Smalltalk-like
syntax for calling methods.
It's not the functional style that
you're familiar with from Java or C#.
In particular,
You can call class methods.
It's bracket, the target,
and then some thing to do.
So in this case,
we're calling the array method
on the NS immutable array class.
And if you were to look at
the NSArray declaration,
you would see a method
declared something like this.
Returns an object,
doesn't take any arguments.
Similarly, we can call instance methods.
Same syntax.
In this case,
we're calling an instance method on self.
Self is like this.
It's a reference to whatever object is
currently executing the current method.
So we're calling the writable
pasteboard types method on the instance,
our self.
And its declaration would look like this.
I think it was actually
a couple slides ago.
Similarly, we can call an instance method
on some random object reference.
We're calling the containsObject:,
or just containsObject method,
passing one argument, type,
on the object types.
[Transcript missing]
It's a single flat
namespace for all methods.
That is, there is a one namespace
for all selectors,
all method names in your application.
There is no type-based dispatch.
So what that means is
when you declare a method,
if you declare the same method
name twice and you declare it with
different types for the arguments,
then you're very likely going
to get compiler warnings.
So generally, you won't see that
done anywhere in Cocoa.
I think there's one case where it's done.
So nil, the empty object,
it eats messages silently.
If you try to call a method on nil,
it's just nothing's going to happen.
As long as the type sort of
looks like an object reference,
it's an integer or a float
or something like that,
you're generally going to
get a zero back if you try to
take the return value from it.
But that behavior is not
really well specified,
and if you look in the documentation,
it will warn against relying upon that.
So, there's no null pointer
exception in Objective-C.
And again, Objective-C,
the arguments are always
interleaved with the method name,
both for declarations
and for invocations.
And it's important to note
that Objective-C doesn't have
keyword arguments that are so
common in scripting languages.
So you could say the arguments are named,
but they're not keywords.
The order is critical.
Change the order,
you get a different method.
Drop something, different method.
Add something, different method.
And Objective-C, being born out of C,
does support variable
number of arguments.
So you've got the vararg style, dot, dot,
dot, declaration available.
And you can parse those lists.
Generally don't see this a lot.
You'll see it within a string class.
You'll see it with some
of the collection classes.
Which,
now that we've got some syntax in hand,
and we have method invocation in hand,
we can talk about memory management.
We're going to talk about
non-GC memory management.
And frankly, C does not provide a lot of
inspiration on this front.
If you have programmed C,
you'll know that a lot of times you have
to go look at the documentation and you
either have to free the thing returned
to you or don't free it or send it off
somewhere else to get cleaned up or,
you know, nil it out or whatever.
I mean, it's a hodgepodge.
And originally, Objective-C was actually
done the same way.
And then in about 19--early '90s or so,
when the APIs that were provided
in the system kind of expanded
and became more of a foundation,
quite literally called the foundation,
Objective-C move to reference counting.
And reference counting
is really dead simple.
It's so simple,
it's very easy to make a mistake.
If you want to keep something around,
retain it.
Literally call the retain method.
If you don't want it anymore,
call release.
And a method might typically, you think,
look like this.
However,
the problem here is that we're returning
something we've retained because we want
it to stay around once we've returned it,
so whoever called us can make a decision
about what they want to do with it.
But now we've kind of said, okay, well,
I'm passing ownership to you.
Well, what if that thing calling
us doesn't want ownership?
What if they just wanted to poke
at my stash of goods a little
bit and then forget about it?
We need some way of
delaying that release,
some way of kind of saying,
we're going to make sure the
object stays around for a while,
and we're going to kind
of throw it out there,
and if anyone else wants it,
you have an opportunity to grab
it before it goes away forever.
This led to the introduction
of auto-release pools.
And what an auto-release
pool does is it's literally,
you can think of it as a bucket.
You throw the object in the
bucket and it sticks around
and eventually the bucket gets
They're automatically created and cleared
for you when you're running a run loop.
So if you're running the
run loop on the phone,
you're running a run loop in Cocoa,
the main event loop,
or you're running a run loop
in a thread you've created,
the auto-release pools will be
managed as a part of the run loop.
You can create them
manually if you want to.
There's an auto-release pool per thread,
generally.
If you have a run loop,
it's created automatically.
If not, you can create one if you want.
When you call retain or you call release
or you call the auto-release method,
which I'll show in a second,
the auto-release throws it into the
auto-release pool for the current thread.
What that means, though,
is when you're doing
multi-threaded programming,
you must make sure that you retain
the object for the duration of
passing it between two threads.
You can never rely on an auto-release
pool to keep an object around long
enough for a thread pass to be safe.
The auto-release pool,
like everything else,
is fully documented.
I actually point the documentation
out because it's actually
quite good on this subject.
Fills in a lot of more detail.
and revisiting the retrieveGoods
method that we wrote before.
Now we can modify this so we
first retain my stash of goods,
and then we auto-release
it before returning it.
And what this means is the caller
can poke at my stash of goods,
do whatever it wants to,
and if it wants to keep it,
it retains it, and if it does it,
it does nothing.
And then when we get to the
bottom of the event loop,
we get to whenever the auto-release
pool for that thread is drained,
then that reference to my stash of
goods will go away if my stash of
goods was replaced in my stash box.
At some point in time,
then the one that was pulled out of
there earlier will get destroyed.
So memory management rules for non-GC,
again, this is the definition of it.
You own any object you create.
That means you've retained it.
You can create objects via methods
that begin with ALAC New or Copy.
I'm going to go through this quickly.
It's all documented.
ALAC New, Copy, Mutable Copy.
Those are things that
create retained stuff.
Everything else generally returns an
auto-released or non-retained reference.
And again, non-retained does not
always mean auto-released.
If you own an object,
you have to release it.
And don't ever directly
deallocate an object.
Because something else
may have retained it.
Maybe the design of some framework
you're using has changed,
and now it's retaining things
when you don't expect it.
So just don't call deallocate directly.
If you don't own an object,
don't release it.
If you call retain,
you've got to balance it with
a release or an auto-release.
Retains can lead to cycles.
So if A retains B, B retains C,
and C retains A, that's a cycle.
It's gotta be broken.
They're hard to debug.
Or, but there's good tools for that.
Or you could just use Garbage Collection.
And under Garbage Collection,
All this stuff goes away.
And there's some great sessions on using
Garbage Collection later in the week.
Unfortunately, Garbage Collection is a
Mac OS X only technology.
So if you're on the phone,
be careful with retains and releases.
There's also an advanced session on
Friday which will go into this in much,
much greater detail.
Plus, there's the instrument session,
which I highly recommend.
Instruments is an incredible debugging
and performance analysis tool.
Okay, so let's go back to our
transaction class for a second.
Let's have a look at these properties.
Now, when you're doing
object-oriented programming,
what's one of the reasons you
do object-oriented programming?
It's so you can encapsulate
things in objects.
Generally, you're encapsulating
data and functionality,
but in this case,
we're looking at some data.
A transaction object has a bunch
of data associated with it.
It has an amount, a date, a description,
things like that.
Well, let's look at what this class
would look like before properties.
Before properties,
you'd have pretty much two
methods for each piece of data.
You'd have a setter, set amount,
set date, set description string,
and a getter, amount, date,
description string.
Pretty repetitive.
Now, you know a little bit about
the memory management stuff.
What you don't see here is
any information to developers
using this class as to how to
manage the memory appropriately.
They don't know if the
date is gonna be retained,
which should be,
but they don't know that.
They don't know if the description
string is gonna be copied,
so they wouldn't know if, well,
what happens if I pass
a mutable string in,
something that could change later?
Is that gonna be bad?
So this is how it was for a long,
long time.
In the last few years,
we revisited this and we captured
The standard Cocoa setter-gitter pattern
into something we call properties.
What properties allow you to do is
to take these very typical repetitive
method pairs and reduce them to
a single declaration per pair.
And at the same time,
give users of your class,
including yourself,
more information to work with
to successfully use that class.
So looking at amount,
we can replace set amount and amount
with an at property double amount.
Properties declaring the type,
it's double, its name is amount.
And similarly,
we can do the same thing for date.
Now, dates aren't mutable,
so we don't need to
worry about copying it.
And we're gonna say we're gonna retain
this thing so that clients of our code
knows that if they pass us a date,
we're gonna keep it around.
So set description string
and description string again.
We can replace it with a property.
In this case,
we're going to say that we copy
the string being passed in.
So clients of our class know
that whatever they pass to us,
we're gonna be copying it so they don't
have to worry about mutating it later.
And we're also going to declare
that this property is non-atomic.
That means that the act of setting
something via this property,
the act of setting the
description string,
isn't going to do anything to protect
against thread-based conflict,
more or less.
And now our class declaration
is a little bit simpler.
And more importantly,
not only is it simpler,
it's also much more precise.
But we didn't stop with
just the declaration side.
Properties also provide tools for
helping you with the implementation of
getting and setting data on your classes.
So in particular,
we can synthesize a property,
which means in the implementation,
in this case the
implementation of transaction,
we are going to synthesize the
description string property.
Which means the compiler will
actually create set description
string and description string
methods for us automatically,
and it's going to use the
instance variable underbar
description string as the storage.
So now not only have we reduced the
amount of code we've had to write
and the least buggy lines of code
are ones you don't write at all,
but we've also taken advantage
of the compiler's ability to
generate these setters and
getters that are exactly correct.
So you don't have to worry
about bugs in the storage.
And now we are in the torturing
a cat phase of the session.
You can also choose to
write it all yourself.
In the case of transaction, the amount,
the set amount methods, they're custom.
They have some custom logic in them,
so the implementer of it just
wrote everything themselves.
As well,
you can actually choose to mix and match.
So for the date property,
we actually have a custom set date method
because it does some additional logic,
but we're letting the compiler
synthesize the date method itself,
the getter.
Finally, the other thing you
can do with properties,
which is pretty cool,
you can say @dynamic.
And this gets back to the
dynamic nature of Objective-C.
What you're telling the compiler
is that even though you're not
providing an implementation
of the methods at this time,
you will ensure that the implementation
comes into existence at runtime before
or during the first time any one
of those properties is accessed.
So,
there's one other aspect of properties.
We also added something we
call the dot syntax in Leopard,
which allows easy access to properties.
And it works for non-property
setters and getters,
too.
So you don't have to convert stuff
to properties to use the dot.
And when you see APIs that use
set something and something as
the standard setters and getters,
you can just use a dot.
And literally,
these two implementations of the
addService method are equivalent.
In every way, outside of the minor
syntactic difference.
So, properties.
It's a syntactic encapsulation of the
standard Cocoa Setter-Gitter pattern,
as well as the iPhone OS Setter-Gitter.
It also declares the memory
management intentions,
so it provides more information to
clients of the class than just the
method declarations themselves.
It ensures compatibility
with Cocoa patterns.
And again,
when we talk about the language,
the language in this case is
inseparable from the APIs of the system.
And by using properties,
you are ensuring that your classes
are going to be compatible with
various mechanisms in Cocoa,
like key value coding,
key value observation, bindings,
and a number of other patterns.
You can automatically synthesize parts
of the implementation using properties.
And those synthesized bits of
functionality can be atomic,
meaning that under threading,
if you pound on a property setter from
two threads at the same time with atomic,
it won't crash.
It might not do quite the right thing,
but it won't crash.
Whereas non-atomic's a
little more efficient,
not quite as safe.
You'll see on the iPhone,
most of the UI kit uses non-atomic
throughout because the user
interface is intended to only
be used from the main thread.
On the, what we call, modern runtime,
which is the runtime
that's on the iPhone OS,
as well as the 64-bit runtime
on Leopard and Snow Leopard,
you can actually synthesize
the instance variable storage.
And this will take care of
basically creating the slots
to store the data away.
When you go this route, though,
at the moment,
you can't actually directly
access the instance variables.
So it's actually interesting
because this allows you to both
synthesize the storage so you don't
have to worry about that part,
but it also means that there's no way
someone can go in through a back door
to change that value out from under you.
So if you have some custom logic
or whatever that you need to do,
this is a way to guarantee that
it gets called at this time.
And this brings us to
the dynamic runtime.
So we've talked about the syntax,
we've talked about memory management,
method invocation.
All of which is built on
top of this dynamic runtime.
And it's important to know that
every method call in Objective-C will
be dispatched by the runtime.
It will go through the
runtime dispatchers.
runtime mechanisms.
No exceptions.
And that in and of itself is
very much an enabling technology.
It's a pattern or a feature that
drives implementation or drives
the patterns of functionality
across the rest of the frameworks.
In particular,
that runtime is what enables
the ability to introspect
object capabilities very easily.
So you can ask objects, "Hey,
can you do this?
Can you do that?" And you'll
see this in Cocoa a lot.
You'll see a pattern called delegation.
Which allows Object A to ask Object B,
"Hey, do you care about,
do you want to do something about this?
Okay, go do something about it."
Which allows you to avoid
subclassing in a lot of cases.
It allows for simpler
implementation patterns.
This also means that dynamic loading,
when you dynamically
load a chunk of code,
you can extend existing classes
through the use of categories.
And because every dispatch is
going to go through that runtime,
those additional methods that you've
added to those classes will be visible.
And of course,
because of introspection and the
ability for the runtime to go,
yes, that object does that, no,
it doesn't do that, that means that this
additional functionality will
immediately become visible.
There's no hidden stuff.
There's no static finals.
There's no optimizer, say,
running that's going to fold
or inline a method on you.
You can also dynamically construct
implementation as needed.
Now,
this is not something you're typically
going to do when you're writing the code,
but it is a pattern that is very useful
to be aware of because there's a lot of
functionality on the system that uses it.
There's a full runtime provided
in the Objective-C runtime itself,
a C-based runtime,
so you can go and you can
actually construct class
on the fly if you want to.
With the at dynamic properties,
there's this method,
resolve instance method.
Go read the documentation on that
and you can actually see how to
dynamically construct the setter
or the getter for a property.
And in particular,
this dynamic runtime enables very
rich proxying and bridging solutions.
So when we talk about this enabling
technology above the dynamic runtime,
and we talk about things like
categories and properties and protocols,
These are pervasively used throughout
Cocoa and throughout the iPhone OS.
You'll see patterns like the delegation,
the key value coding,
key value observation, Cocoa bindings,
even things like
Interface Builder itself,
which Interface Builder is allowing
you to graphically configure a bunch
of objects for your user interface.
When you hit save,
it doesn't generate code.
It uses the NS coding protocol
to archive a binary copy of that
configuration of the user interface
that can then use the NS coding protocol
at runtime to pull that back in,
connect everything back up.
Again, connecting everything,
that's a lot of introspection,
key value coding, the bindings is using
key value observation,
etc.
Core Data, which uses dynamic property
generation and actually will generate
classes at runtime for your models.
Again, it allows Core Data to be a
much simpler implementation,
while at the same time achieving
levels of performance that are
just really frankly astonishing.
And I encourage you to
go to Cocoa Fundamentals.
Even if you're an iPhone OS programmer,
if it fits into your schedule,
go to Cocoa Fundamentals,
because so much of the Cocoa Fundamentals
is universal to the iPhone.
And the What's New in Core Data session
is very interesting as well.
So when we talk about the
introspection and delegation,
this is a pattern that is pervasive
enough I really wanted to call it out.
When an application is launched,
the NS application,
the one shared application
object that's created in every
Cocoa application as it launches,
it has a delegate.
And you'll typically set that
delegate up in Interface Builder.
You can do it in code if you want.
And the first thing the application
does is it asks its delegate,
"Hey, delegate,
do you respond to the selector?
Application will finish
launching." And if it does,
it calls it.
Now, what's interesting about this
is this means as a developer,
you don't have to subclass
the application class.
You can have kind of an application
controller thing that maybe does
some application control stuff and
maintains some other state in your
app that can also help customize
the launching of an application.
And you'll see there's probably, I think,
close to a dozen of these delegate
methods for application alone.
Some other classes that have delegates,
the file manager for handling files,
file creation and file errors,
NSKeyedArchiver,
which is a part of the NSCoding protocol.
This is actually interesting because
this allows you to do things like if you,
say, rewrite your app for a 2.0,
you can use the NSKeyedArchiver delegate
to help convert your 1.0 data without
actually having to subclass and greatly
change the Cocoa coding mechanism.
The XML parser,
there's a number of others.
At the application layer,
NSWindow is very much like NSApplication.
You can use the delegates to do
things like change the way the
window resize behavior works.
If you want a window that's
always four by three,
you could do the math in the delegate
method to ensure that that's the case.
NSTableView, NSImage, NSText,
all of these things have these
delegates that allow you to control
their behavior without subclassing.
And the same thing with the XML parser.
If you're new to Objective-C,
there's a number of other applications
that allow you to do things like change
the way the window resize behavior works.
If you want a window that's
always four by three,
you could do the math in the delegate
method to ensure that that's the case.
And the same is true on the phone.
So when we talk about dynamic loading,
there's an NSBundle class.
And this is just a little snippet of code
that actually shows loading a bundle.
And I wanted to call this out
briefly because Objective-C,
one thing it doesn't have is namespaces.
It's something that a lot of people
have requested over the years.
We are definitely aware of
the need for namespaces.
But we frankly haven't come up with
what we would consider to be an elegant
enough solution to provide at this point.
You need to keep that in mind.
Avoid namespace conflicts.
They can be problematic.
Typically, it's done by having a prefix.
If you notice,
all the Cocoa classes have NS.
All the iPhone classes have UI,
Core Animation, CA.
So pick some free prefix.
I would suggest three letters
because I don't think any of
Apple's stuff uses three letters.
And when we talk about dynamically
generated implementation,
this is not a piece of code that I want
to go into in terribly much detail,
but it's rather advanced.
It's also not a piece of code that
I would expect that many of you
are ever going to need to write.
However, I wanted to call it out because
this is a demonstration of the use
of the Objective-C API underneath.
So you'll see things like selector
manipulation and adding methods,
etc.
And these are bits of functionality
that are actually leveraged quite
a bit in the Cocoa frameworks.
So when we talk about
proxying and bridging,
this is another pattern
that you will see often.
For example, the scripting bridge.
Which allows basically you to
generate an Objective-C class whose
API talks via Apple script through,
not really actually Apple script,
via Apple event to an application.
And it generates those
classes on the fly from that
application scripting dictionary.
So this actually allows you to treat,
say, iTunes as an object,
as an instance of some class.
The bridges between Objective-C and
scripting languages,
it turns out Objective-C is
a very natural language to
bridge to other languages
because of this dynamic runtime.
They all use these APIs.
In particular,
they use something called Bridge Support,
which is a bunch of metadata
on the disk that describes
all the APIs in the system.
And the Cocoa Development Using Scripting
session later on in the week is
actually going to cover a lot
of this information in detail.
If this is of interest,
I highly recommend that you go see that.
And finally, proxying.
So what proxying allows you
to do is literally create
an object that's a proxy,
that's a stand-in for another object.
And that stand-in can capture
all the method calls that would
normally go to the real object
and do something about it.
In the case of key value observation,
every time you say use Cocoa bindings
or you're using core data,
it's actually creating a proxy for your
object such that any time the setter
or the getter is called via protocol
or via properties or via the methods,
the key value observation proxy will
pick that up and give other parts
of your application notification
that something's about to be read,
about to change, or that it did change.
Distributed Objects,
which is a technology that's
built into the foundation,
uses proxies,
and it literally enables a local proxy,
a local object.
[Transcript missing]
So, Objective-C.
It's a small set of additions to C,
as you've seen.
And the focus is really
on simple and consistent.
And through that, I believe, elegant.
I've been doing this for a while.
It's built on top of a dynamic runtime.
That dynamic runtime is both there for
your use as well as leveraged heavily
by the frameworks that you'll be using.
It uses a very simple object model.
You have single inheritance.
You don't have type-based dispatch.
But this also means that you don't
have things like namespace mangling
and other complexities of debugging.
You can reuse interfaces
through the use of protocols,
which you've seen are used quite
often in the Cocoa and on the iPhone.
It has a very simple
method dispatch mechanism.
Every single method goes
through that dispatcher.
There's no type-based dispatch.
There are selectors.
Selectors are method names.
Selectors are first class
type in Objective-C,
and you will see them often.
There are labs.
We will actually be in the
labs pretty much all week long.
So if you want to find us, come down,
look for the team.
We're happy to answer
any questions you have.
If you see us in the hallways,
pull us aside.
We're quite happy to help.
There's official lab times as
well for the Objective-C 2.0 lab,
and as well as garbage collection lab,
which I don't know why
it wasn't on there.
There's some publications.
Thank you, Bill.
I'm going to go ahead and introduce
you to the next section of the session.
Objective-C is C.
There's the classic Kernegan and Ritchie,
the original C programming language book,
or C for Dummies.
It's another very good book, actually.
As well, there's lots and lots of
documentation on your systems already.
The Objective-C 2.0 programming
language is an excellent document,
though.
Object-oriented programming in
Objective-C is just another great way
to use object-oriented programming.
It's a really nice piece of introduction
to object-oriented programming,
too.
There's the Cocoa Fundamentals Guide and
the iPhone OS Programming Guide,
which of course are all built on top of
the foundations provided by Objective-C.
There's some very,
very useful mailing lists as well.
There's the CocoaDev
and the OBSI-Lang list.
Sorry, I call it OBSI-Dev.
These lists are on Apple's list server.
The community of people in
there are extremely helpful.
If you have questions,
bring them to these lists and
you'll find the answers very,
very quickly.
The archives are all online as well,
and there's extensive
resources in the archives.
These are wonderful just reference
materials as well as being a really
warm and friendly community of people.
Useful people.
There's one of them right here,
Michael Jurowicz, the seventh.
There's also Derek Horn.
And, of course,
plenty of documentation in the
Mac Dev Center and the iPhone Dev Center.
With that,
I would like to open this up for some QA.